ETHAN DIGITAL ACADEMY

CODING & PROGRAMMING FUNDAMENTALS
 PYTHON BEGINNER PATH — COMPLETE VISUAL STUDY MANUAL

 Paid Enrollee Course Material

 Course Code: EDA-COD-171

 Level: Beginner

 Duration: 8 Weeks (18 Lessons)

 Certificate: Professional Certificate in Coding & Programming Fundamentals

 Prerequisite: Computer Appreciation / Digital Literacy

 Learning Format: Classroom + Guided Coding Practicals + Final Project

 

COURSE OVERVIEW
Coding is the process of writing instructions that a computer can execute. Programming goes further by
combining code, logic, data and problem-solving to create useful software. This course introduces these ideas
through Python, a readable programming language suitable for beginners.

The course is written for learners, not professional developers. Every lesson explains the concept first, shows
a small example, and then gives a guided practical that can be completed in a classroom or beginner coding
environment.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 Explain coding, programming, algorithms and programs.
 Plan solutions with algorithms and flowcharts.
 Use Python variables and basic data types.
 Accept input and display output.
 Perform arithmetic and comparison operations.
 Use IF/ELIF/ELSE decisions.
 Use FOR and WHILE loops.
 Create reusable functions.
 Work with strings, lists and dictionaries.
 Handle simple errors and debug code systematically.
 Read and write simple text/CSV-style data.
 Understand modules and basic object-oriented thinking.
 Build, test and document a complete beginner project.

COURSE OUTLINE
 Lesson Topic
 1 Introduction to Coding and Programming
 2 Algorithms, Pseudocode and Flowcharts
 3 Python Environment and First Program
 4 Variables and Data Types
 5 Input, Output and Type Conversion
 6 Operators and Calculations
 7 Decision Making with IF
 8 FOR Loops
 9 WHILE Loops
 10 Functions
 11 Strings
 12 Lists, Tuples and Dictionaries
 13 Debugging and Error Handling
 14 Files and Simple Data
 15 Modules and Reusable Code
 16 Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming
 17 Planning and Testing a Software Project
 18 Final Python Project

 

LESSON 1: INTRODUCTION TO CODING AND PROGRAMMING
A computer follows instructions. Coding expresses those instructions in a programming language, while
programming combines instructions with problem-solving and software design.

 Figure 1. The input-processing-output model.

Key Terms
 Code - instructions written in a programming language.
 Program - a set of instructions that performs a task.
 Programming language - a structured way to communicate instructions to a computer.
 Programmer - a person who designs and writes programs.

Input, Processing and Output
Many programs accept input, process it according to rules, and produce output.

Examples of Programs
Calculators, school result systems, games, websites, banking applications and mobile apps all use
programmed logic.

Guided Practical
1. List five programs you use.

2. For each, identify one possible input and output.

3. Write three problems that a simple program could help solve.

Review Questions
1. What is coding?

2. What is programming?
 

3. What is a program?

4. Explain input, processing and output.

Assignment
Create a one-page poster explaining how a program works.

 

LESSON 2: ALGORITHMS, PSEUDOCODE AND FLOWCHARTS
Before writing code, programmers can describe the solution as a sequence of logical steps.

 Figure 2. An algorithm and equivalent flowchart.

Algorithm
An algorithm is a clear sequence of steps for solving a problem.

Pseudocode
Pseudocode describes program logic in plain structured language without requiring exact programming
syntax.

Flowchart
A flowchart uses shapes and arrows to show the sequence of actions and decisions.

Good Planning
A good plan identifies inputs, processing, decisions and outputs before coding begins.

Guided Practical
1. Write an algorithm for adding two numbers.

2. Write pseudocode for deciding whether a score is Pass or Review.

3. Draw a flowchart for the addition algorithm.

Review Questions
1. What is an algorithm?

2. What is pseudocode?

 

3. What is a flowchart?

4. Why plan before coding?

Assignment
Plan an algorithm for calculating the average of three scores.

 

LESSON 3: PYTHON ENVIRONMENT AND FIRST PROGRAM
Python code can be written in an approved beginner environment and executed to produce results.

 Figure 1. Programs transform instructions into visible output.

Python Syntax
Syntax means the rules for writing valid Python code.

First Output
The print() function displays information.

Comments
A comment begins with # and can explain code for human readers.

Indentation
Python uses indentation to show blocks of related code. Consistent indentation matters.

Code Example
 print("Welcome to Ethan Digital Academy")

Guided Practical
1. Open the instructor-approved Python environment.

2. Type and run the first program below.

3. Change the message and run it again.

4. Add a comment explaining the program.

 

Review Questions
1. What does print() do?

2. What is syntax?

3. What is a comment?

4. Why does indentation matter?

Assignment
Write a program that displays your academy, course and a learning goal.

 

LESSON 4: VARIABLES AND DATA TYPES
A variable gives a meaningful name to a value so the program can use and change that value.

 Figure 3. Variables and common Python data types.

Naming Variables
Use clear names such as student_name or course_fee. Avoid spaces in variable names.

Basic Data Types
 str - text
 int - whole numbers
 float - decimal numbers
 bool - True or False

Assignment
The equals sign assigns a value to a variable.

Checking Types
Python's type() function can show the type of a value during learning and debugging.

Code Example
 student_name = "Ada"
 age = 16
 course_fee = 65000
 active = True

Guided Practical
1. Create variables for a learner name, age, course fee and active status.

 

2. Display each variable.

3. Use type() to inspect the values.

4. Change one value and run the program again.

Review Questions
1. What is a variable?

2. Name four basic data types.

3. What does = do in an assignment?

4. Why are meaningful variable names useful?

Assignment
Create a learner-profile program using four data types.

 

LESSON 5: INPUT, OUTPUT AND TYPE CONVERSION
Interactive programs can receive information from a user and use it in calculations or messages.

 Figure 3. Data types determine how values behave.

input()
The input() function receives text entered by the user.

Type Conversion
Use int() or float() when numeric input is required for calculations.

Formatted Output
f-strings can combine text and variable values clearly.

Validation Awareness
Real programs should check unexpected input. Beginner exercises will start with expected classroom values.

Code Example
 name = input("Enter name: ")
 score = float(input("Enter score: "))
 print(f"{name}: {score}")

Guided Practical
1. Ask the user for a name.

2. Ask for two numbers and convert them to float.

3. Add the numbers.

 

4. Display the result with an f-string.

Review Questions
1. What does input() return by default?

2. Why is type conversion needed?

3. What does float() do?

4. What is an f-string used for?

Assignment
Create a simple course-fee enquiry program.

 

LESSON 6: OPERATORS AND CALCULATIONS
Operators allow programs to calculate values and compare information.

 Figure 1. Programs process input using instructions and calculations.

Arithmetic Operators
 + addition
 - subtraction
 * multiplication
 / division
 % remainder
 ** exponentiation

Comparison Operators
 == equal to
 != not equal to
 > greater than
 < less than
 >= greater than or equal to
 <= less than or equal to

Order of Operations
Parentheses can make calculations clearer and control evaluation order.

Practical Calculation
A program can calculate totals, averages, discounts and simple business figures.

Guided Practical
1. Create variables for quantity and unit_price.
 

2. Calculate total = quantity * unit_price.

3. Calculate the average of three scores.

4. Test whether the average is at least 50.

Review Questions
1. What does * do?

2. What does == mean?

3. What does % return?

4. Why use parentheses?

Assignment
Build a simple shopping-total calculator.

 

LESSON 7: DECISION MAKING WITH IF
Conditional statements let a program choose different actions depending on whether a condition is true or
false.

 Figure 4. A decision flow using IF.

if
Runs a block when a condition is true.

else
Runs an alternative block when the IF condition is false.

elif
Adds another condition between IF and ELSE.

Logical Operators
 and - both conditions must be true
 or - at least one condition must be true
 not - reverses a Boolean condition

Code Example
 score = 68
 if score >= 75:
 print("Distinction")
 elif score >= 50:
 print("Pass")
 else:
 print("Review")

 

Guided Practical
1. Enter a score.

2. Use IF to display Pass when score is at least 50.

3. Add ELIF for Distinction at 75 or above.

4. Add ELSE for Review.

5. Test values around the boundaries.

Review Questions
1. What is a condition?

2. What does ELSE do?

3. When is ELIF useful?

4. Differentiate AND and OR.

Assignment
Create an age-appropriate course-category selector using fictional values.

 

LESSON 8: FOR LOOPS
A FOR loop repeats instructions over a sequence or a known range.

 Figure 5. A loop replaces repeated instructions.

range()
range() can generate a sequence of numbers for controlled repetition.

Loop Variable
The loop variable takes each value in the sequence in turn.

Accumulation
A loop can add values into a running total.

Avoid Unnecessary Repetition
Loops make code shorter and easier to maintain when the same pattern repeats.

Code Example
 for number in range(1, 6):
 print(number)

Guided Practical
1. Print the numbers 1 to 5.

2. Print Welcome four times.

3. Calculate the total of numbers 1 to 10 using a loop.

4. Loop through a short list of course names.

 

Review Questions
1. What is a FOR loop?

2. What does range() do?

3. What is a loop variable?

4. Why are loops useful?

Assignment
Create a multiplication-table program for one chosen number.

 

LESSON 9: WHILE LOOPS
A WHILE loop continues while a condition remains true.

 Figure 5. Loops repeat instructions efficiently.

Condition-Controlled Repetition
WHILE is useful when the number of repetitions is not known in advance.

Updating the Condition
The program must eventually change something that can make the condition false.

Infinite Loops
A loop that never reaches a stopping condition can continue indefinitely. Design a clear exit condition.

Counters
A counter can track how many times a loop has run.

Code Example
 counter = 1
 while counter <= 5:
 print(counter)
 counter += 1

Guided Practical
1. Set counter = 1.

2. Use WHILE to display 1 through 5.

3. Increase the counter each time.
 

4. Change the stopping value and test again.

Review Questions
1. What is a WHILE loop?

2. What is an infinite loop?

3. Why must the condition change?

4. What is a counter?

Assignment
Create a countdown program from 10 to 1.

 

LESSON 10: FUNCTIONS
Functions package related instructions into reusable named blocks.

 Figure 6. A reusable function with a parameter and return value.

Defining a Function
Use def followed by the function name and parentheses.

Parameters
Parameters receive values supplied when the function is called.

Return Values
return sends a result back to the caller.

Benefits
Functions improve reuse, readability, testing and organisation.

Code Example
 def add(a, b):
 return a + b

 result = add(4, 6)
 print(result)

Guided Practical
1. Create greet(name).

2. Call the function with two different fictional names.

 

3. Create add(a, b) that returns a+b.

4. Store and display the returned result.

Review Questions
1. What is a function?

2. What is a parameter?

3. What does return do?

4. Give two benefits of functions.

Assignment
Create three small reusable functions for a result program.

 

LESSON 11: STRINGS
Strings store text and provide useful operations for searching, cleaning and formatting text.

 Figure 7. Collections and text are common program data.

Indexing
Characters in a string can be accessed by position.

Useful Methods
 lower()
 upper()
 strip()
 replace()
 split()

Length
len() returns the number of characters.

Combining Text
Strings can be joined with + or formatted with f-strings.

Guided Practical
1. Create a course_name string.

2. Display it in upper and lower case.

3. Use strip() on text with extra spaces.

4. Use len() to count characters.

 

5. Split a simple comma-separated string.

Review Questions
1. What is a string?

2. What does len() do?

3. What does strip() do?

4. What is split() used for?

Assignment
Create a name-cleaning program.

 

LESSON 12: LISTS, TUPLES AND DICTIONARIES
Collections allow programs to store several related values.

 Figure 7. Lists and dictionaries.

Lists
Lists are ordered and can be changed.

Tuples
Tuples are ordered collections commonly used when values should remain fixed in a simple program.

Dictionaries
Dictionaries store key-value pairs such as name → Ada.

Looping Collections
FOR loops can process each item in a collection.

Code Example
 courses = ["Word", "Excel", "Cybersecurity"]
 student = {"name": "Ada", "course": "Excel"}

Guided Practical
1. Create a list of five courses.

2. Add one course and remove one.

3. Loop through the list.

4. Create a dictionary for one fictional learner.

 

5. Display the learner's course using its key.

Review Questions
1. What is a list?

2. What is a tuple?

3. What is a dictionary?

4. What is a key-value pair?

Assignment
Create a small course catalogue using a list of dictionaries.

 

LESSON 13: DEBUGGING AND ERROR HANDLING
Debugging is the systematic process of finding and correcting problems in a program.

 Figure 8. A structured debugging workflow.

Syntax Errors
The code breaks Python's writing rules.

Runtime Errors
The program starts but encounters a problem while running.

Logic Errors
The program runs but produces an incorrect result.

Debugging Method
Read the message, reproduce the problem, inspect the relevant code, make a focused change and test
again.

Basic Exception Handling
try/except can handle expected errors such as invalid numeric input, but it should not be used to hide every
problem.

Code Example
 try:
 score = float(input("Enter score: "))
 except ValueError:
 print("Please enter a number.")

 

Guided Practical
1. Run a teacher-provided program with a harmless syntax mistake.

2. Read the error message and correct it.

3. Create a simple numeric input example with try/except.

4. Test expected and unexpected input.

Review Questions
1. Name three error categories.

2. What is a logic error?

3. What is debugging?

4. What does try/except help manage?

Assignment
Write a debugging checklist for beginners.

 

LESSON 14: FILES AND SIMPLE DATA
Programs can save information to files and read it again later.

 Figure 9. A program reading and writing simple data.

Text Files
Text files store human-readable characters.

CSV-Style Data
Comma-separated rows can represent simple tables.

Reading and Writing
Python can open a file for reading or writing. Close files properly; using with open(...) handles this
automatically.

File Safety
Use only your own practice files. Do not overwrite important files during exercises.

Code Example
 with open("practice.txt", "w") as file:
 file.write("Microsoft Excel\n")

Guided Practical
1. Create a practice text file.

2. Write three course names to it.

3. Read the file and display the contents.

 

4. Create a simple CSV-style file with name,course,status.

Review Questions
1. What is a text file?

2. What is CSV-style data?

3. Why is with open useful?

4. What file-safety rule applies in class?

Assignment
Create a program that saves a simple learner report to a new practice file.

 

LESSON 15: MODULES AND REUSABLE CODE
Modules help organise code and provide reusable functions.

 Figure 6. Functions are building blocks for reusable modules.

Importing
import makes approved module features available to a program.

Standard Library
Python includes many built-in modules for common tasks.

Own Modules
As projects grow, related functions can be placed in separate Python files.

Responsible Use
Understand what a library does before using it and use trusted sources for external packages.

Guided Practical
1. Import the math module.

2. Use math.sqrt() on a positive classroom value.

3. Create a small file with one reusable function if your environment supports multiple files.

4. Import and call the function.

Review Questions
1. What is a module?

2. What does import do?
 

3. What is the standard library?

4. Why should external packages come from trusted sources?

Assignment
Prepare a one-page explanation of reusable code.

 

LESSON 16: INTRODUCTION TO OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING
Object-oriented programming groups related data and behaviour into classes and objects.

 Figure 10. Data and behaviour grouped in an object.

Class
A class is a blueprint describing attributes and behaviours.

Object
An object is an instance created from a class.

Attributes
Attributes store data about the object.

Methods
Methods are functions associated with the object.

Beginner Perspective
OOP is introduced here conceptually; mastery comes with larger projects and further study.

Code Example
 class Student:
 def __init__(self, name, course):
 self.name = name
 self.course = course

Guided Practical
1. Define a simple Student class with name and course attributes.

 

2. Create one fictional Student object.

3. Add a method that displays a summary.

4. Create a second object and compare the values.

Review Questions
1. What is a class?

2. What is an object?

3. What is an attribute?

4. What is a method?

Assignment
Draw an object model for Student or Course.

 

LESSON 17: PLANNING AND TESTING A SOFTWARE PROJECT
A successful beginner project starts with a clear problem, small features and planned tests.

 Figure 11. A simple software-project workflow.

Requirements
State what the program must do and what is outside scope.

Decomposition
Break a large problem into smaller tasks or functions.

Test Cases
Test normal values, boundary values and simple unexpected input.

Documentation
Explain the purpose, inputs, outputs and how to run the program.

Version Discipline
Save working copies as the project improves so mistakes can be reversed.

Guided Practical
1. Write requirements for a student result manager.

2. Break the program into five functions/tasks.

3. Create six test cases.

4. Write a short user guide.

 

Review Questions
1. What is a requirement?

2. What is decomposition?

3. What is a test case?

4. Why is documentation important?

Assignment
Submit a project plan before coding the final project.

 

LESSON 18: FINAL PYTHON PROJECT
The final project combines input, variables, calculations, decisions, loops, functions, collections and simple file
output.

 Figure 12. Architecture of the final Student Result Manager.

Project: Student Result Manager
Create a program that accepts a fictional learner name and several scores, validates the expected numeric
range, calculates total and average, determines a result category, displays a clear summary and optionally
saves a report to a new practice file.

Required Skills
 Input/output
 Variables and data types
 Arithmetic
 IF/ELIF/ELSE
 Loop
 Function
 List or dictionary
 Basic error handling
 Readable output
 Testing and documentation

Quality Standard
Use meaningful names, clear prompts, sensible functions and comments where they add value.

Guided Practical
1. Plan the input and output.

 

2. Write the calculation function.

3. Write the result-category function.

4. Add a loop for scores.

5. Add safe input handling.

6. Display the summary.

7. Test at least six cases.

8. Document and submit the program.

Review Questions
1. Which concepts does the project combine?

2. Why should score boundaries be tested?

3. Why use functions?

4. What should the user guide explain?

Assignment
Submit the complete program, test table and short user guide.

 

REAL-LIFE CASE STUDY - ETHAN DIGITAL ACADEMY
Ethan Digital Academy wants a simple classroom program for recording practice assessment results. The
learner first plans the algorithm, then creates variables for names and scores, uses a loop to collect several
scores, calculates the average with a function, uses IF/ELIF/ELSE to classify the result and displays a
readable report. The program is tested with normal and boundary values before a practice report is saved.
This small project demonstrates how programming combines logic, data, testing and communication.

FINAL PRACTICAL PROJECT - 100 MARKS
1. Write the project requirements and algorithm.

2. Create a flowchart or pseudocode.

3. Accept a fictional learner name and multiple scores.

4. Use a list to store scores.

5. Use a loop to process the scores.

6. Create functions for calculation and result classification.

7. Use IF/ELIF/ELSE for the result category.

8. Handle simple invalid numeric input.

9. Display a professional summary and optionally save a practice report.

10. Submit six test cases and a short user guide.

QUIZ - 30 QUESTIONS
1. What is coding?

2. What is programming?

3. What is an algorithm?

4. What is pseudocode?

5. What is a flowchart?

6. What does print() do?

7. What is a variable?

8. Name four Python data types.

9. What does input() do?

10. Why is type conversion needed?

11. What does * mean?

12. What does == mean?
 

13. What is a condition?

14. What does ELIF do?

15. What is a FOR loop?

16. What is a WHILE loop?

17. What is an infinite loop?

18. What is a function?

19. What is a parameter?

20. What does return do?

21. What is a string?

22. What is a list?

23. What is a dictionary?

24. What is a syntax error?

25. What is a logic error?

26. What is debugging?

27. What is a text file?

28. What is a module?

29. What is a class?

30. What is a test case?

FINAL EXAMINATION - 100 MARKS
Section A - Objective Questions (20 Marks)

Twenty questions covering programming concepts, Python syntax, data types, decisions, loops, functions and
collections.

Section B - Short Answer and Code Reading (30 Marks)

Explain concepts, trace short beginner programs and identify simple errors.

Section C - Practical Programming Assessment (50 Marks)

Build a small Python program from a supplied classroom problem using input, calculations, decisions, loops,
functions and testing.

 

COURSE COMPLETION OUTCOME
Graduates of EDA-COD-171 Coding & Programming Fundamentals will understand core programming logic
and be able to create, test and explain small Python programs. They will be prepared for Python for
Beginners, JavaScript Programming, Software Development Basics, API Fundamentals and App
Development Fundamentals.